#Abstract
The movement to incorporate datasets into the scholarly record as ‘first class’ research products (validated, preserved, cited, and credited) has been slowly building momentum for some time, but the pace of developments picked up substantially in the last year.  Data publications are beginning to spring up all over the place, but there are still significant debates over formats, processes, and terminology.  This article will give an overview of the initiatives underway and the current conversation, highlighting places where consensus seems to have been reached and issues still in contention.

Data publication implementations follow variety of models that differ in, among other things, what kind of documentation is published, where the data resides relative to the documentation, and what validation is performed.  Data can be published as a standalone product, as supplemental material to a traditional journal article, or with a descriptive “data paper”. Confusing the situation, terms are often used by different initiatives to refer to partially overlapping concepts.  The term ‘published’ always means that the data is public and citable, but it may or may not mean peer reviewed.  In turn, data ‘peer  review’ can refer to substantially different processes– although data paper referee guidelines are all fairly similar.  There is substantial agreement on the elements of a dataset citation (which closely resembles that of a journal article) but a variety of solutions for citing subsets of datasets or datasets that change over time.  Finally, some are already looking past data publication to other metaphors, such as ‘data as software’, for solutions to unsolved problems.

#What does "data publication" mean?
Although the idea (and ideal) of sharing data between researchers has been around for a long time, momentum is building to not just share, but "publish" data.  This shift in terminology reflects a push to incorporate datasets into the scholarly record as 'first class' reserach products.  The idea is to increase data sharing by a.) tieing into exisitng mechanisms for awarding credit to reward dataset publishers, and b.) formalize citation and preservation of datasets to combat the significant problem of data loss.  However,  it isn't totally clear what exactly is meant by "publication" when applied to data.  Two agreed upon properties are that published data is **available** now and for the indefinite future, without asking permission of the researcher (although it may be goverened by a use agreement or otherwise restricted), and that it is formally **citable** in the manner of a journal article (the key property being that a citation now can be used to locate and identify the dataset for the indefinite future; a persistent identifier like a DOI is the usual way to accomplish this, but it isn't essential).  A third property is sometimes wrapped into the term: to some, published data is **trustworthy**, meaning that it has been certified by some community standard, often by peer review.  Sarah Callaghan (2012) drew a useful distinction between data that has been shared, lowercase-p published, or uppercase-P Published; shared data is available, published data is available and citable, and Published data is available, citable, and trustworthy.

#Why publish data?

#What does a data publication look like?
Data publication is a relatively novel form of publication, and there are a variety of models being implemented.  It seems unlikely that any single model will be best for every dataset.  Models of data publication can be broken down in a variety of ways.  For instance, Lawrence (2011) identifies five models based on which organization is reposnisble for what.  For my purposes here, I'll break data publications down into three categories by the accompanying documentation: a traditional article, a "data paper", or nothing.

##Data publication with a traditional journal article
This is the most familiar model to researchers.  After collecting a dataset, the researcher analyzes it, draws conclusions, and writes a traditional scholarly journal article, which is published more or less simultaneously with the release of the dataset.  In the past the datset was usually hosted on the journal's website as supplementary material.  This practice is becoming less popular, and journal publishers aren't necessarily well suited to the job.  Nature neuroscience stopped acception supplemental material.  Instead, the data can be housed in a better suited repository.  For some kinds of data, in some fields, this has been the standard for a long time– microarray data, protein structure, nucelotide sequence.  The Dryad repository accepts data underlying publications.  They started with a focus on ecology, but accept data from any field.  Dryad makes data avialable and citeable, but any assesment of trustworthiness is done as part of the peer review of the article.

##Data publication with a data paper
Data papers are a realatively new type of journal article that describe datasets (collection methods and rationale).  Data papers are becoming popular in a variety of formats.  What unties them is exclusion of analysis or any attempt to draw any conclusions.  Data papers are being published in journals dedicated to the format, such as Nature Scientific Data and GeoScience Data Journal, as well as in journals that publish other types of papers, such as F1000 Research, Internet Archaeology, or GigaScience.  Most of these journals require the data to be published in a third-party trustworthy repository, although a few are associated with repositories and hande the data themselves.  Data papers are peer reviewed (more later); some take the novelty or potential impact of a dataset into consideration, while others only require that the data be scientifically valid.

##Standalone data publication
To be useful for anything, a dataset must have accompanying description, or 'metadata', but this needn't resemble a journal article.  Standalone data publications can include rich or relatively thin metadata in structured or freeform flavors.  These publications may or may not include an element of peer-review.  Figshare, for instance, publishes datasets– providing accessiblilty and citablility– without any form of validation (although a Figshare dataset associated with a datapaper may have been reviewed).  On the other hand, Open Context publishes very high quality archeology datasets with optional peer review.  

#How does publication work?

##Availability
In general, data publication